---
title: "Go Preact! ❤️"
categories:
  - Preact
  - React
---

You might have heard of [Preact](https://preactjs.com), the tiny 3KB alternative to React. It has been around for awhile, and since its inception it claims to be API and feature compatible compared to the more widely used Facebook library.

After using Preact for quite a while I come to the conclusion that Preact is much more. It offers a totally different development and design philosophy, and has the potential to solve a ton of problems the current JavaScript ecosystem has to face. In this article I try to compile a list of things that I find outstanding.

## Progressive ecosystem

```javascript
import {
  html,
  render,
  useState
} from "https://unpkg.com/htm/preact/standalone.mjs?module";

function Counter() {
  const [count, setCount] = useState(0);
  return html`<div>
    ${count}
    <button 
      onClick=${() => setCount((prev) => prev + 1)}>
      Increment
    </button>
  </div>`;
}

render(
  html`<${Counter} />`,
  document.querySelector("#app")
);
```

## Tree-shaking optimized

Everything about Preact is opt-in. In fact, Preact [decides against having default exports](https://preactjs.com/guide/v10/upgrade-guide/#using-named-exports) where you can suck in the whole framework at once. It requires you to be intentional about everything you load (unless you use the compatibility layer, see below). That way, you only end up with what you actually need.

This is incredibly useful if your bundler works with tree shaking. Do you only need the `useState` and `useEffect` hooks? Then you won't get any others in your production bundle. 

I spun up a quick [Vite project](/typescript-vite-preact/) and compared a couple of simple components, pulling in progressively more features.
A simple `Greeting` component:

```typescript
function Greeting({name = 'Stefan'}) {
  return <p>{name}</p>
}
```

As well as the counter example from above. Here are the results.

1. `Greeting` function component: Minified 8.60kb, brotli: 3.20kb
2. `Greeting` class component: 8.64kb, brotli: 3.22kb (most likely due my part being more verbose in a class)
3. `Counter` class components, no hooks: Minified 8.73kb, brotli: 3.27kb
4. `Counter` function component using `useState`: Minified 10.02kb, brotli: 3.73kb
5. `Counter` function component using `useState`, logging `useEffect`: Minified 10.17kb, brotli: 3.79kb

It's still incredibly small, but when you look at the minified site you see the size slowly increasing.

Being optimized for tree-shaking is just another way to express the progressive nature of the framework. The good thing is that you don't end up with any surprises once you ship. This makes tracking down things a lot easier in the long run.

## First level TypeScript support

If you have been following my blog you might think that TypeScript is a very relevant topic to me. Actually, my [TypeScript + React](/typescript-react/) is my most popular resource on this blog.

The `@types/react` package is excellently written and maintained, but it is a third-party add-on. There *might* be some differences, and also occassions where the framework and its types are out of sync. Not to mention that types need to be versioned differently as their bugfixes progress differently.

Preact ships types with each release. It is also written in TypeScript, but makes use of adding types via JSDoc comments and maintaining additional types in `.d.ts` files. Preact is actually an excellent case-study for this approach. If you're interested, I really invite you to browse through the source. Start [here](https://github.com/preactjs/preact/blob/master/src/create-element.js), with the `createElement` function. You much likely see TypeScript usage as you've never seen it before.

## Full React compatibility

To stay as small as possible, Preact gets rid of lots of internal React functionality that you would rarely use in your day to day work. Things include support for `React.children`, `PureComponent`, `forwardRef`, etc. Legacy functionality that's deprecated, but still supported. Framework internas. That kind of things. This also means that things like hooks are not part of the main package, as everything in Preact is opt-in.

But Preact *is* designed to be a drop-in replacment for React, so this functionality is required by legacy applications, by frameworks like [Next.js](https://nextjs.org), or maybe by the component library that you include in your application. Preact patches this functionality via their `preact/compat` library.

This library includes all hooks, as well as patches for everything that was intentionally dropped to reach the 3KB goal. There are some [guides on the Preact website](https://preactjs.com/guide/v10/getting-started#aliasing-react-to-preact) on how to alias React to work with Preact, but my most favorite way is NPM aliasing.

NPM aliases install NPM or GitHub packages under a different name. That way you can point `react` to `preact-compat`, and the module resolution of Node figures out things on its own. I swapped in Preact for React in all my Next.js projects, and all it took me was adding those lines:

```javascript
{
  //...
  "dependencies": {
    "preact": "^10.4.6",
    "preact-render-to-string": "^5.1.10",
    "react": "github:preact-compat/react#1.0.0",
    "react-dom": "github:preact-compat/react-dom#1.0.0",
    "react-ssr-prepass": "npm:preact-ssr-prepass@^1.0.1",
    //...
  }
}
```

And, of course, removing the old installations of `react` and `react-dom`. Switching to Preact shaved off 110 KB of minified production JavaScript, which resulted in 34 KB of minified + gzipped JavaScript.

## Authoring library for web components

Web components are always a good way to start a hot discussion on Twitter. And there seems to be this existential divide between people who prefer their shiny tech toy framework, and others who love "using the platform". I love that Preact doesn't give a damn about this discussion. It just loves and supports both sides.

There's a little library called [`preact-custom-element`](https://github.com/preactjs/preact-custom-element) that allows you to register you Preact components as web components.

```javascript
import register from 'preact-custom-element';
import { h } from 'preact';
import { useState } from 'preact/hooks';

function Counter() {
  const [count, setCount] = useState(0)
  return <div>
    {count}
    <button 
      onClick={() => setState(prev => prev + 1)}>
      Increment
    </button>
  </div>
}

register(Counter, 'my-counter')
```

Preact also allows you to think of web components not as an authoring layer for your apps, rather than a compile target or distribution possibiilty. You still write your apps and components with JSX in the virtual DOM, just as you are used to from React. But it's easy to compile to a web component for distribution. Since Preact is so small, it also makes sense to use it as a web components run-time. Pick the level where you want to draw the line to enter web components land: Down at the presentational components, up at a widget level, or an entire applications? All of it? It almost comes for free.

## Independent

I love React for its technical ingenuity and have the utmost respect for its core members and the innovation they bring along. Plus, members like Dan Abramov also put the human at the center and help foster a welcoming community.

Still, React is a framework by Facebook and for Facebook. It solves Facebook's needs first, and it's just coincidence that they have a lot in common with the needs of everybody else. Personally, I got weary of buying into a framework that is developed by a big tech corporation.

And you know... there's the ethical dilemma.

Preact is independent. It is *backed* by Google projects, sure, but it's not a Google framework. This also means that the team can work on things that would not end up on React's roadmap if its not part of their overall goals. Preact ships an official router. Preact has an official web components layer. The Preact team ships a way to write without a build step.

I'm aware that those things exist for React as well. But it's an explicit non-goal of the React team to provide everything.

## Gotchas



## What about Context?

It has `Context`. Apparently the lack of `Context` is a myth that won't fade!

## Further information

If you can spare an hour, I recommend watching those two talks.

- [Sara Vieira's Preact talk at React Day Berlin](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jqXRSvXWYf8). Sara gives an overview on Preact, highlighting some points that I make here, but others as well. The talk is already older, but the main philosophy around the framework and most points she makes still hold up.
- [Marvin Hagemeister's talk at Script'19](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=VWyV65yLTwg). Marvin does an excellent talk on code golfing. He's member of the Preact core team and shows how they managed to include an entire virtual DOM implementation while staying small. Highly recommended talk!

And if using Facebook's libraries keeps you up at night, take a look at [this project by Andy Bell](https://npm-uninstall-facebook.com/).
